No,
Can, can we pass some papers around or is, sorry?
Can we pass some papers around? Is that Yes.
Okay. You got enough to go with this? Yep. 15 as in.
Great. Thank you. Thank you.
Are these different from each other? No,
You are the problem.
So Gambling foundation for start. Yes.
Thank you. I was gonna say, you're the problem.
We're definitely not the problem.
There was no stop in my voice. Continual flow.
Now we've got our seats down the back there.
We did get our biggest room, um, available.
Maximum number of seats,
but we still might be extended at all.
Alright, look, well thanks very much,
uh, for all those attending.
We'll just introduce for the sake, introduce ourselves
as a committee, um, just the one.
So, um, everyone. So doing it rest of the time.
I'm Greg O'Connor. I'm the chair of the, um,
petitions committee, uh, member of parliament in du,
Sorry, electorate.
MP for Mon. Hi,
I'm Hamish Campbell.
I'm MP for
Ida. I'm Ka
Carter Greening party best MP based in Christchurch.
And we do have another member, um, another committee
Off everyone.
I'm not a member of the commission,
but just listening to the submission. A thank you.
Alright. Okay, I look, thanks,
um, for your attendance today.
Um, Ms. Thompson, uh, I'll let you introduce yourself.
10 minutes, um, take your submission as read,
but, uh, we'll look and speak to it
and hopefully leave time for questions at the end.
Thank you. Uh, Tina Koto, Kato, um,
thank you for the opportunity.
Speak today. Um, I'm Alyssa Thompson
and, um, I'm the CEO at Problem Gambling Foundation
and my colleague Andre Fru, who's, um, our Director
of Policy Advocacy Comms.
Um, and we're presenting today on behalf of our colleagues
who work across the gambling harm sector, um, including
Asian Family Services and Puerto.
Um, we are the organizations
who see gambling harm on the ground every day of the week.
Um, and if, um, at some point you want to hear stories
and, um, narrative around what gambling harm looks like,
these are the people who can share, um, that with you.
Um, thank you very much for taking our petition seriously.
Um, we are calling for a complete prohibition on gambling
advertising in New Zealand across all forms of gambling
and on all platforms.
I guess we're ahead to issue a bit of a challenge today.
If you've set your views on gambling harm based on
land-based gambling, it's time for a reset.
Our growing concern about gambling
advertising stems from a rapid surge in online
and sports betting, advertising the global digitalization
of gambling and the ification of entertainment.
In a more general sense,
our young New Zealanders are growing up in a world world
where sports games
and even paper elections are betting events,
they're exposed at every turn through loop boxes
and online games, lotto shops as they enter the supermarket,
spinning a wheel for discounts when they're shopping online
or in game betting.
Odds delivered by sporting heroes
through a national sporting event,
gambling has been normalized without adequate recognition
of the inherent risk and harm.
The current and emerging regulatory net
around gambling is inconsistent and in places conflicting.
We return profits for community good
through harmful products.
We bank ban pokies from being promoted
beyond venue signage at the same time as allowing highly
forms of gambling like online casinos
and sports betting to be aggressively advertised.
The gambling act seek
to control growth while our state owned operators advertised
to grow profits to return to community.
We recognize gambling is harmful with one hand
and encourage young gamblers with the other.
Today I'm gonna talk a bit about why advertising causes
harm, but my particular focus is on young people.
Um, we wanna take a look at some of the, um, arguments and,
and, um, positions that were shared
through other submissions
and just provide some context for that.
I suppose industry says there's no solid link
between advertising and harm.
The evidence says otherwise. Advertising is not neutral.
It's designed to stimulate more frequent gambling,
increase spend, and create positive
associations with gambling products.
Full stop. A Lancet Review found repeated exposure
to gambling ads increases uptake, normalizes the behavior
and drives harm in Australia.
People who saw gambling ads weekly
and more were twice as likely to place impulse bets
with the effects strongest in 18 to 34 year olds in Spain.
When advertising and bonus restrictions were introduced
recently, both new accounts
and total money bet fell
directly linked to those restrictions.
We hear and I say we across all of the country
and across all of the forms of gambling
and across all our priority populations.
Hear stories of people triggered back into gambling
through direct marketing in their inboxes, impossible
to resist inducements
and a barrage of gambling content served up as social media.
Yesterday we heard a story of a young man
who can no longer watch live sporting broadcast
because of in-game promotions
and live betting opportunities, literally no longer able
to watch live Sport wants to watch it, he has
to watch it on replay.
Gambling ads are literally wrestling our love
of sport out of safe hands.
Some say ads don't affect kids, that's misleading.
Um, in submissions, it relies on the 23 gambling survey
that asked the question,
if any under eighteens had ever made an unplanned bet
because of an ad, it misses the point.
Children can't legally place bets The real harms the early
exposure that's caused.
And Wellington, the kids can study.
Children of children found that children were exposed
to gambling ads seven times a day in everyday places like
shops, like the supermarket
and bus stops in the uk, gambling content was found
to be four times more appealing to 11
to 24 4 year olds than to adults.
With almost all social media content ads triggered
triggering positive emotional responses in young people,
this matters because adolescent brains
are wired differently.
Reward systems develop early while impulse
control develops late.
That means advertising
and influencer driven promotions hit
young people the hardest.
They feel stronger urges and have less ability to resist.
I think we all know that. Uh, they get a sense
of belonging from being the insider sentiments
that are served up in jokes, niche information,
special language with research showing high rates of youth,
following an subscription to tips
to influences and platforms.
Operators claim they don't target youth
intent doesn't matter when is exposure is everywhere.
Age gates are porous.
TAVs be brand, brand markets itself
as a new generation betting experience.
They use the same social platforms. Our young people.
And when I say young, I don't mean 18 year olds.
I mean our 11 year olds use daily
and 21 lot who partnered with six 60
a band woven into youth culture only backing down
after public back backlash on school drop off This morning,
one of our colleagues was listening to the radio
and heard ads promoting Father's Day scratchies over 18
products on DriveTime school drop offs.
We know of many, many cases
of under eighteens betting at school
and even fights over gambling debts and playgrounds.
Exposure is happening and it's sticking.
Industry says New Zealand isn't saturated like the
UK or Australia.
That may be true today, but it's exactly why we must act.
Sports betting ads have already surged with arrival
of tain importing Australia's saturation model.
And our young people do not live in a vacuum.
They're on TikTok, they're on YouTube, they're on Instagram
and exposed to the same global stream of gambling promotions
as their peers overseas.
As one of the last OECD countries
to regulate online gambling, we have been targeted
by offshore operators.
Let's not repeat the mistake
and be the last to control gambling advertising.
Lotto and TAB say
that without advertising they can't meet mandated profits.
This is misleading both illegal monopolies.
Everyone knows where to buy a lotto ticket
or place a TAB bet advertising only stimulates more losses.
International experience proves is starting to prove
that profits don't require advertising
and Norway nor tipping.
Cut its ads spend by 40%, then another 20%
and revenue still rose slightly.
And this emerging case monopoly operators are remaining
viable and community funding continues.
Industry says ads are needed to channel people
to licensed operators.
I can assure you that there are safer tools that work.
Government trust, badge badges, public registers
and independent consumer education when combined
with strong enforcement include blocking illegal ads,
stopping payments, ISP restrictions.
These measures can effectively channel
without harmful advertising.
It's not necessary. Operators also point
to responsible gambling messages in their ads.
The evidence is clear, it couldn't be clearer.
They don't work. Research shows that in some cases
they even boomerang making, making gambling feel safer
and increasing the urge to gamble.
Real prevention comes from independent public health
messaging, not from operators branding their own
promotions as responsible.
The DIA themselves acknowledge the limits
of self-regulation when it comes
to the advertising standards authority.
It's voluntary. It cannot police influencer content
or digital saturation at a population scale.
Gambling advertising is not neutral information.
It's engineered to grow and drive losses.
Adolescents are particularly vulnerable.
Their reward systems mature early while self-control lags
behind exposure through influences.
Fast moving promotions
and social media algorithms means our young people are being
groomed to see gambling as normal and harmless fun.
The evidence is consistent.
Advertising increases harm, volume, tree codes
and industry messaging don't adequately protect
monopolies don't need ads to survive.
And cha channeling can be effective without gambling,
without advertising, advertising.
Sorry. The choice is simple.
Either allow gambling advertising
to shape the next generation
or act decisively to protect young people.
Now. Thank you. If you've got questions, we've got time.
We'd love to answer them.
Yes, we've got time for a couple of questions.
Um, one I'd like to ask is that some
of our submitters have talked about separating gambling out
from the alcohol
and tobacco, um, sort of strategies
around advertising, et cetera.
Um, any, will you have any thought on that?
So they are separate already? Mm-hmm.
Well, yeah, they're separate, but just,
but a lot of the submitters have said, well,
don't compare gambling with alcohol and tobacco.
Um, as for its harm, um, what would you,
what would you reply to that be?
I don't know that we necessarily agree with that.
There's definitely similarities there.
Harmful products,
and we certainly, I mean, we, we want
to see obviously gambling advertising banned,
but there certainly needs to be guardrails
as there is with alcohol and tobacco.
I mean, there's are harmful products there age restricted.
So you wouldn't see, um,
an alcohol ad if you are watching TV at six o'clock.
But you will see a lot of ad and you will see a TAB ad.
But those are harmful products.
They cause harm and our young people are being exposed to
that every single day.
Thank you. Um, members,
any other questions? Yes. Yeah. How
Long, how long have we had the current prevalence, uh,
in advertising of gambling?
I mean to, I mean, in my view it's, it's, it, it it seems
to have proliferated massively in recent years.
Is that a correct perception? Yes,
A hundred percent. Yeah.
It's certainly exploded with the introduction of Tang.
Um, and, you know, the essentially direct import
of an Australian view on, on advertising, which, you know,
works through saturation.
Um, the data's not there yet to hold it,
but I think every single person in this room will have the
experience of, um, be ads, um, proliferating.
Um, and their experience
of watching sports will have changed.
Um, supplementary one.
Um, what,
what are your thoughts on the government's recent
announcement around advertising, uh,
around licensing a certain number of online providers?
Um, in terms of the advertising of that, again,
we would like to see that prohibited.
Okay. Uh, and you know, from what we know
with the regulations that are being proposed, um,
they're not gonna be nearly tough enough.
You know, we're seeing people being harmed already.
We've seen, you know, the horse is actually already bolted,
pardon the pun, because we are already seeing on social
media huge numbers
of ads from these offshore operators using nefarious means
to do so through influences, through other ways of,
um, getting to people.
And often, often young people are on these platforms.
So, you know, we definitely want to see, um,
or we'd like to see that prohibited, um,
because, you know,
they're leaning very heavily on the channeling argument,
but we don't, don't actually agree that that is necessary
that you need advertising to effectively channel.
One of the logic of that is
that at least the advertising will be only towards the legal
product and will steer people away from the illegal
property, non-licensed product.
Any, uh, view on that?
We don't, we think that that can happen without
advertising, which regardless of
how you target it from avoiding you, there's overfill,
there's just no question about it.
You know, we know that, um, um, tain
and Becher are targeting 18 to 20, 30 5-year-old males,
but we know that 11-year-old kids in intermediate schools
are talking about Becher products.
There's just no question that you can keep, contain that,
you know, the only answer is to not advertise.
Alright. Look, thank you.
Um, we'll have to, um, leave it there.
Um, welcome to remain in the room. Um, thank you.
And we've got, uh, DIA, um, will be
and we'll just, um, leave Benjamin leave for Benjamin.
Do, I'm just, I'm not participate.
Well that will, we'll give you, give you leave anyway.
You might thank, yeah.
Alright, thank you. We have, um, who's leading us off today?
I will. Thank you. Um, good afternoon.
My name's Kelly Mullum, the manager
of the gambling policy team at DIA.
I'm drawn, joined by my colleagues, Jane Beggs,
policy director and Vicki Scott, gambling regulator.
Alright, thank you. And I might compliment the, uh,
the paper that you've, it's a very good 1 0 1 on the
whole industry in New Zealand, actually.
Um, very good.
Um, can I take the paper as read
and just take any questions that you might have?
Yeah, any, any elaborations on it or just as a thread? So,
Um, I, I might just, um, state
that we have done quite a lot of research and preparing
and, um, advice for the government on the bill.
Um, we did a lot of international jurisdiction search on
what's happening in the gambling market.
Um, and just wanted to reiterate
that jurisdictions which introduced severe restrictions
or prohibited gambling advertising, um, did so in response
to the liberation of the market.
Um, and they have all a, a lot of them have, um,
gone back and had to put in place restrictions
because it, um, many people are going into the black market,
um, into unregulated gambling. So,
So, so they put total restrictions on,
are you saying, and then they, they
Had to go back Liberalize em a little
because of the black market?
Yes. No differentiation between the black market
and the legitimate gambling.
Yes. So Without
putting words in your mouth, that's what
Say. Yeah. So channel,
channel channelization rates went lower,
um, because there was a total ban, so no one knew
who was regulated, unregulated,
and they brought back in
restrictions, restricted advertising.
So in the, in the submissions
and the preparation to get the bill to this stage,
was there much work done on the advertising aspect of it?
Obviously it covered the bill covers several dimensions.
Uh, yes, absolutely.
There was, um, quite a lot of advice on advertising.
Um, and as I say, a lot of research with, uh,
international jurisdictions and what's worked
and what hasn't, um,
and the online gambling ban in Australia
and how a lot of people are
gambling anyway in the black market.
Um, and we are looking at advertising regulations at the
moment and they're under development.
So we're just consulting on those.
Um, we had, one of the comments made
by the gambling foundations was that age gates are porous.
Um, any comment on that?
I mean, I thought it was quite a, that, that any restriction
or age gates you put on, particularly on
that they're quite porous.
Any in your research, any,
any comment you'd like to make on that?
Uh, we are still looking at that.
Um, it's part of the work in our regulations.
That's one of the options that we're looking at.
Alright, thank you. Uh, members, any further questions
or clarifications?
No, no. My, my questions were all around this,
this area which I've even spoken to.
Well, look, thanks again much again. Um, very good paper.
Thank you. Probably the questions as a reflection on
how much information is in here.
Thank you very much. Um,
and we have the Gaming Machine Association
New Zealand, Mr.
Den Gate Thrush. Thank you. Yes. Welcome.
We've, uh, had your submission,
which again was a very good in depth submission.
And, uh, forward to hearing from you.
10 minutes and time for questions, hopefully.
Good afternoon, Kira,
and thank you for the opportunity to appear.
I'm just going to take you very quickly through a couple
of points, um, perhaps by way of introduction explained,
because not everybody understands this.
I didn't, when I came into the situation, we represent,
we're the trade association effectively for the 35 trusts
who are all carefully licensed
and regulated by the department to manage, uh,
the gambling that we manage.
The Class four gambling. These are the electronic gaming
machines and the clubs and the pubs outside the casinos.
All class four. All class four. Yeah.
So we represent those trusts
and of course, not only are are are the members the trust
license, but all the venues are licensed as well.
And I'll, I've mentioned in my submission,
there's a very carefully regulated industry already.
There are hard minimization regulations
and there are regulations covering things
like advertising and care.
Uh, we take in about 10 or $11 billion a year.
We're a major part of the New Zealand hospitality industry.
Uh, and we give back 92% of that, which is one
of the highest rates of return in the gambling system.
That means about a billion dollars a year is
coming into the system.
About a third of that gets used to run the system
and pay commissions to pubs and clubs
and people running the machines.
About a third of it comes back to the government by way
of GST and fees to the department and various other ways.
And that leaves another third of a billion dollars,
which goes back to the community by way of grants.
We make about 10,000,
our members make about 10,000 grants a year of their money.
About half of it goes to sport
and the rest of it goes to keep helicopters flying, uh,
supporting the opera and, and various other activities.
So, uh, that's who we are.
Um, we say there's no basis, uh, in the current system, uh,
or in the, or in the petition
or any of the background to the petition
that would support a ban, uh, in in Blanc to our area.
I know you've had some broad submissions covering all
of gambling, but we're just talking about ours.
And as I mentioned, it's already a very highly regulated
and controlled, uh, thing.
There's very little advertising.
In fact, it's currently allowed for class four gaming.
And I've listed on, uh, the bottom
of the page of my submissions.
Uh, the machines themselves are not allowed
to be visible from outside the venue.
Jackpot advertising can't be visible from outside the venue.
Uh, machines that we're not allowed to put words up, um,
we can't incur any costs on that.
We're only allowed to incur costs that are reasonable action
and necessary for conducting the operation.
Advertising is not included.
So there's a strong set of regulations already surrounding,
uh, our activities.
We think that, and we heard that today from the PGF, the,
the, the, the thrust of this has been stimulated, I think
by the online gambling changes that are coming.
And much of what they want is directed to online gambling.
And with that we have some, uh, agreement.
Um, what we say though is
that the online casino gambling bill
does appear to address those.
Um, whether they do that satisfactory or not, we're not sure
'cause the regulations, uh, haven't come out.
Uh, we think that the prohibition on advertising
by unlicensed providers, for example, is wide
and extraterritorial and useful.
We think the penalties are and should be severe,
and we think the Department of Internal Affairs is, uh,
the right place and is well resourced
to actually carry this out.
So we say there's no justification for imposing a ban, uh,
an advertising ban on, on, on our part of the sector.
And we think that sector specific regulation is always going
to be more effective and better taking into account the
differences between the various markets, consumers, uh,
avenues and channels than some wholesale ban on,
on gambling advertising.
We don't think wholesale bans on things ever work.
Uh, I'd like to also, um,
thoroughly endorse the submissions from our
regulator in this case.
The department has put together as your,
as the chairman has commented, a very good paper on this,
which explains a lot of it.
We also support what our trade competitors, if you like,
the lotto and TAB said in their submissions about this.
Uh, so there's reasonable industry coherence on this
and I think I'd like to finish with an attack, um,
or a rebuttal of the, the underlying presumption here,
which is based, uh, which is simply a mistake.
And it was repeated by the PGF.
And that is this assumption which,
which appears sensible at, at the start.
And that is that more gambling means more harm.
And that's an academic theory called the exposure theory,
that the more people are exposed to gambling,
the more harm will be caused.
And it's in it's intuitively feels right.
The evidence is that it's not right.
The evidence is that the ex the the academic evidence is
that the exposure theory has been substantially discredited.
And one piece of that evidence is simply that the rate
of gambling has changed dramatically
and the forms of gambling have changed,
the population has increased,
but the rate of problem gambling has stayed the
same for nearly 20 years.
The Health Ministry of Health does the surveys every three
years and uses an international standard
for measuring gambling harm.
The New Zealand, the rate of the, the lowest, the hardest,
the worst, the, the prob the rate of problem gamblers
as opposed to moderate or the severe one.
There's not 0.1% of the population.
And it's been that for about 20 years, which is yes,
that it's a population effect, probably genetic
and probably linked to other areas of harm.
It's got nothing to do with
how much gambling is actually going on.
And what's developed in the academic paper since,
and I'll refer you to one, the, um, recent one
by Max Abbott, who's a reasonably well known, uh, academic
of this space, what's been developed
as this adaptation theory,
which rejects the exposure theory.
And it says that what happens is there's a bit
of a surge when a new form of gambling occurs.
And this happened in 1990s into early 2000 when
gambling was changed in New Zealand,
but the population adapts to,
and that the rate of problem gambling then change goes back
to its baseline level.
What you've heard today from the problem gambling foundation
is this constant thing that advertising,
because it's gonna cause more gambling,
is gonna cause more harm.
There is no academic support for that.
What might happen is a blip at the start, as
with an adolescent enthusiasm as things start
and then the population adapts and adjusts.
And the latest academic papers are developing a theory as
to why that adaptation might work.
And they think it might be
because the first people who are attracted
to it are problem gamblers to start with,
but then other gamblers come in and take over.
So I'd urge you to have a look at that and,
and understand that there is no academic basis
for this thrust, that somehow
advertising causes more gambling
and more gambling is gonna cause more harm.
And I'll stop at that and answer any questions.
Um, so 20 years ago was
that when machines were introduced to
New Zealand, that's when legal, legal,
Legal machines, They were
introduced slightly before that.
And it was, as I understand it, I've been told
by my colleagues there was, there was all sorts of, um, uh,
unsavory practices.
And so the current gambling act was brought in in 2003
that created this very strongly regulated system.
So the fact that virtually every pub, every
has now a, a gambling room out the back,
um, that doesn't increase the amount of Well,
you are saying it might increase the amount of gambling,
not the amount of problem gambling. Exactly. So
Just just to, just to clarify, most pubs don't have the,
the number of gaming rooms actually quite restricted.
Uh, it's governed by local council regulations.
The number of gaming machines has dropped from when
that act has passed from about 24,000 down
to about 14,000 now.
So we actually lost nearly 50%
of the gaming machines over that period.
And yet the rate of problem gambling is unchanged.
So when I hear club managers saying, don't force us
to take the machines out
because we can't exist anymore without these,
and I reply to them, actually, you gotta look at yourself.
Are you a club or are you a gaming venue?
If that's the case, and I've had that said to me
by people from several, um,
chartered clubs, your response to that.
So the regulations require
that you do not get the majority of your income from gaming.
You have to get your major, the majority of your income.
The regulators, I think still
behind me will clarify which rule that is.
But they, that's part of what the, what the department is,
is auditing and checking is that these pla
that the places are not deriving the majority
of their income from gambling, they've gotta get it from
food and beverage and other entertainment.
And if they do, then their licenses.
If if they don't do that, then their license is at risk.
But you're, but you're right, there are organizations
that rely very heavily on their gaming income
as they're entitled to do, providing a legitimate form
of entertainment to hundreds of thousands of kiwis
Or gaming, bringing people into the venue,
which is slightly different.
That too. Yeah.
So the clubs, the clubs are slightly different in that, uh,
uh, the ones in the pubs have to return their money
to the broad community,
but the clubs are allowed to treat their club
as their community and
so they retain the profits inside the club.
I accept that. Uh, little bit of differentiation,
but most club, do you know what percentage
of the chartered clubs have machines? Would you
Have, don't search. Would
you have I I could find clubs.
New Zealand would be the association that would answer
that. I could get that.
Alright, thank you. Um, members, other questions?
No, that's comprehensive. Thank you. Alright.
Um, so that research, so that wasn't in your paper, was it?
No, I, I can, I'll forward that. Mm,
Thank you. So the research
says, just to repeat that,
that there's no evidence that, um, that's the same number
of problem gamblers.
Despite the number of, of, of opportunities to
Gamble. The,
the exposure
to gambling does not increase the rate of problem gambling.
And increasing the number
of gamblers does not increase the rate of problem. 'cause
That, that's all I saying, that countries that that
Muslim countries have less alcoholism than, um, countries
where alcohol's freely available.
I know we don't like to compare,
but it's a bit of a stretch.
Um, who, who, who, who that research who, um, there's
A string of research papers running,
starting from about 2003
and four where, where the starts to become apparent, having,
having, as I say, just the surprise of many
because the intuitive approaches, the more
of this there is the more harm there's gonna be.
But in fact, the research shows that the rate
of problem gambling stays the same.
Just, I just, can we make sure we get that copy of
That? Yeah. And then, and then I'm
imagining
that PGF will have their, um, thoughts
and critique on it as well, but that, that would be,
Well, I think they know that.
I, I think, I think if you look at the support in their
paper for the claim that increasing gambling increases harm.
There's a single paper from,
from the World Health Organization
and that just asserts in one line the commercialization
of gambling in many countries,
which also drives normalization is increasing
the incidence of harm.
Yeah. There is no footnote,
there's no authority in the, in the paper for that.
And all the authorities of the, uh, to the contrary that
PGF know this research as well as anybody, they know Abbott
and they know these paper abbots in New Zealand are
publishers in New Zealand or Australia,
or Australian publishers in New Zealand, Australia.
I, I'm intrigued that your organization is actually making
a submission on this because since you don't advertise,
and in fact you're quite strictly not able
to advertise in the reality of it,
someone's sitting in a club, um, could be
actually taking revenue away from your club
because if they are succumbing to this advertising
and doing their okay discretionary dollar online,
then it may actually be money
that won't go into your clubs, into the machines.
So I'm just intrigued
that you would be making a submission on this area.
'cause in fact it may actually be better
For you if we, if we banned all it
Better, better for you if, if what
if it was banned altogether? What,
What my submission says is that you don't need to,
it doesn't need to be banned in relation to us
'cause we're already so tightly controlled.
It wouldn't, that wouldn't make much difference.
And in relation to everyone else, we think the regulations
for online gambling are gonna be, are going to gonna try
and address that problem.
Okay. I'll just ask One question. Oh yes, certainly.
Thank you. Thank you for, um, being here today.
Just wondering when this, um, research from Matt Abbott,
which we will definitely go on
and read, came out, um, I think we can all agree
that the changing landscape of, um,
the internet is probably some uncharted territory.
So just wondering if
that has taken into consideration in the, um, research,
particularly if it's sort of started in
2003. Yeah,
Most recent paper I read is dated 2 20 23
and that's the paper that posits that this, the reason
for this flattening out might occur
because the first people get
that go in are the problem gamblers and,
and cause additional problems.
And then as the other gamblers come in, that takes it out.
So yes, I think, I think the, the given the internet's been
around in most of our lives since about 1995, um,
that's taken care of.
Thank you. Thank you. Alright. Alright. Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, Mr. Dinga Thrush, um, lotto New Zealand.
Alright, welcome. Um, Jason, is it
Sure. Thank you.
Two minutes. Yours.
I look forward hearing from you. Right.
Good afternoon, Missy. Um, so by way of introduction,
I'm Jason Delamore, CEO at, uh, lotto
and Rugby is Leah Nielsen, our, uh, chief marketing Officer
and Will Hein, our head of, um, corp comm
and government relations.
So let me just, um, touch on probably our key messages.
Um, first and I'll summarize the key points.
So we agree with a petitioner
that gambling advertising can potentially, uh,
can be potentially harmful to consumers, uh,
especially within populations
that experience harm disproportionately, we disagree
that Lotto New Zealand should be prohibited from gambling
advertising, and this is
because we have a strong commitment
to minimizing gambling harm as per our statutory obligation.
I'll talk a bit more about that further.
We have a demonstrated track record
of doing this in the context of our responsible advertising.
The petition rightly calls out the online ga uh, um,
online gambling risks as increasing, uh, particularly
with the new legislation.
But we believe that that legislation addresses those
that risk is currently before the house.
We do agree restrictions should apply
to gambling advertisers and in Lottos case we go above
and beyond those, um, minimal requirements today.
And we will talk a bit more about that shortly.
So as some useful backgrounds, we are Crown entity owned
by all New Zealanders,
and we have a clear statutory purpose under the
GA current Gambling Act.
Uh, and that is to generate profits for distribution
to community causes, uh,
and to maximize these profits subject to ensuring
that the risk of problem gambling
and underage gambling is minimized.
That's built into our core purpose.
Last year we, we return $434 million to communities
and that was distributed
to just under 4,000 different community groups
up and down the country.
Uh, advertising is a crucial way of communicating
with our customers as we are at mass market business
that builds trust, contributes to strong
and recognizable brand, enhances transparency of our offers
and our operations, and increases, uh,
awareness of our products.
As a lottery, our model is for a lot of people
to gamble just a little, uh, and well within their means.
And as an example, our average transaction last
year was $18.
Um, and we rely upon mass marketing to achieve that, albeit
with the precautions taken to avoid targeting populations
most susceptible to harm.
And that's something we take very seriously.
Uh, we held our sales to a high standard
of responsibility on all of our marketing practices.
Our advertising goes beyond relevant legislation,
advertising standards and general expectations
of our customers, and includes a range
of measures not required of us by law.
In particular, we actively avoid targeting priority
populations, Maori Pacific, and Asian communities.
We note that the proposed online casino gambling bill is
expected to contain a range of strong controls related
to advertising by online casinos,
which we think is the appropriate way
to manage the advertising, uh,
and best aligned to the risks.
Advertising is a key way to channel would be gamblers
to regulated operators where harm minimization controls
and consumer protection will exist, uh, as mentioned
by the DEA in DIA in their submissions.
So with that, I'll hand over to Leah, who will, um,
explain a bit more about our practices.
Thank you Jason. Kira.
Um, I'll briefly outline Lotto New Zealand's approach
to advertising, um,
and specifically how we work hard, um,
to avoid targeting youth and vulnerable communities.
As Jason said, we are a mass market brand
and in, in a year, uh,
3 million adult New Zealanders can play our games.
Um, and so with that kind
of reach comes a great level of responsibility.
So to deliver on our statutory purpose,
our advertising is designed to be engaging,
however, that has to always be balanced
with our commitment to harm minimization.
And over the past five years,
our marketing spend has remained stable, adjusted only
for inflation, and has declined
as a percentage of total sales.
This reflects our disciplined
and social responsibility approach.
Central to our strategy are our harm minimization
guidelines, which govern everything from creative
development through to media placement.
These are mandatory
and every piece of promotional material is reviewed
by a cross-functional subcommittee with escalation
to executive leadership if needed.
We go well beyond
what is required under the advertising standards code
and the gambling act to avoid targeting youth
and priority communities.
And a few examples of this are we design
and place advertising to appeal to audiences age 25
and over, not just 18, and certainly not youth.
In fact, our games are not designed to appeal
to youth at all.
Every television ad is, um, checked
to ensure it avoids content that appeals
to younger audiences or vulnerable groups.
For example, we never advertise in shows like
or other TEO programming.
We don't advertise on radio stations like Flavor or My Fem.
And instead we donate that ear time to charity.
We avoid billboards in areas of high deprivation.
So that's, um, areas nine and 10.
Um, unless the message is about responsible gambling,
we exclude outdoor advertising
and regions with high representation
of priority populations such as Northland,
south Auckland, rota, poa.
We've self-imposed strict frequency caps.
Traditionally, we used to sometimes place one ad, uh,
three ads and just one commercial break.
Now we have strict measures in place
to ensure we would only show up a maximum
of twice, um, in an hour.
Uh, and likewise, we've heard a lot about online advertising
and we, like all New Zealanders, are very rare, are aware of
how much that has escalated in recent times.
We also impose strict frequency caps so
that we would only have one advert, um,
per person per day in those environments.
And in 2020 we launched Play Smart,
which is our responsible gambling initiative.
It's designed to educate all players, not just those at risk
around how to play safely.
And it's backed by research
that informed players do make better choices.
Messaging is across all of our advertising
and elevated during high risk periods, such
as when the Powerball jackpot is high.
And for example, we we share messages such as if you've lost
before, you are not likely to win, uh, next time
or, um, if hi jackpots, um, still have the small odds.
Finally, I want to be clear about what we don't do.
We do not use social media influences
or affiliates to sell our products.
We don't offer cash bonuses to entice,
um, or retain players.
And any promotions that we do are limited
and tightly managed sponsorships require chief executives
sign off and must align with our values.
For example, our partnership
with the New Zealand Olympic Committee,
which is grounded in our longstanding
connection with Sport New Zealand.
And we don't participate in large cultural events
where audiences may be at greater risk, for example,
Pacifica or um, Auckland Lantern Festival.
So our advertising practices reflect a deep commitment
to responsibility, transparency,
and care for our communities.
And now to pass over to Will who will share
how this commitment translates
to the gambling harm statistics for our products.
Yeah, Koto, um, just to build on what Leah said there, um,
she discussed how we'd created Play Mart, um, a way
to communicate to our customers about, uh, the odds
of winning Lotto and our other games.
Um, some of the ways that we come up with Play Smart
and our other, um, campaigns
that are focused on safer gambling, uh, through engagement
with the same priority populations that are identified, uh,
in the petition from the problem Gambling foundation, uh,
namely the Maori Pacific and Asian communities.
We liaise and engage
with those communities on a frequent basis with a view
to ensuring that we get authentic, genuine feedback, uh,
on our campaigns and feedback that helps us
to influence the way, uh, that we advertise.
Uh, some of the ways that this has manifested itself has
been through the place Mark, uh, uh, campaign by Leah.
We also had a did you know, campaign recently,
which again looked at the odds of winning lotto
and help people to understand, um,
how that manifests itself.
At the moment. We're in the final stages of camp, uh,
trialing a campaign around pause, think, skip, uh,
we've tried this already in South Auckland and PO
and this came off the back of engagement
with the Pacifica community.
Uh, just moving to harm.
Um, there's been a bit of discussion around harm today
and what the level of harm is.
Um, we recognize that recorded harm isn't a true measure
of actual harm caused by gambling.
However, the figures that are available from the Ministry
of Health show that, uh, right now, uh, uh,
f Lotto customers, um, harm is reported
by about 0.5 people per 10,000 customers.
That was about 1.9 per 10,000 customers, uh, back in 2016.
So it has fallen. However, as I say, we wouldn't profess
to be experts in how that harm shows up.
Uh, just that recorded harm is dropping.
Uh, lastly, um, just to build on, uh, one of the points made
by the DIA, um, which is that in markets where
a gambling ban has taken place, some
of those jurisdictions have, uh,
either walked back those restrictions
or looked at reviewing them
after finding that actually the outcome, um,
of having those restrictions in place is
that players find themselves, uh, guided
to the black market instead of legitimate
licensed regulated operators.
Uh, I'd also, uh, add one last point
and that is that where a gambling ban has been introduced
overseas, often the main national lottery is
excluded from that ban. Thank you.
Alright, thank you. Um, just another, a question.
The average transaction $18, um,
how is that measured?
Is that, so if someone goes in
and buys five $18 tickets No.
The average, how is that?
Yeah, the average of the total transaction,
But if you buy 'em, obviously you buy 'em separately.
It's, you, you, I mean that's, that's so per,
someone goes in and buys, they normally wouldn't go and buy.
Think of it as wallet size.
The, to the average wallet size is 18.
What you dunno is how many times
people are going into buying.
Yeah, you'd have to go repeatedly back
and not just one transaction.
You can easily buy five tickets in one transaction,
but the average total transaction is $18.
And have you done any work on the
demographic who buys lotto?
Yes, as I said, um, we have up to 3 million New Zealanders
that can play our games in any given year.
So it's very And do,
Sorry, is that, when you say can, do you mean they're able
to or they do play?
Oh, they, they do, but that's, depending on our jackpot.
Ru run suite typically would get more players if the jackpot
was high in a given year, but up.
So it's truly is a mass market brand
and that means that generally it's the, it's the bell curve
of the population, but we'd certainly skew older.
Um, and so from 30 plus is our general age.
Okay. So I just, so you've identified three groups,
you know, Pacifica, Maori, Asian.
Do you, does, do you have research that would indicate
what percentage of those people are your customers?
Very, our player base is very statistically
representative of our population.
And how do you know that? We know that from our
research that we undertake month, every,
every month rolling, we take um, a service,
a representative sample of, of the population
and ask that very same thing.
How often are they playing and ask about ethnicity and age.
Yes, Caroline, um, just one question.
You talked about, um, a decline in sales.
Did I hear that right? And um, talked about
that this might be due to that your statutory obligations
and um, your strategy around advertising.
Have you considered that that also might be
because of the increase of cost
of living in New Zealand? Oh,
Apologies. That was around.
It wasn't around a decline in sales.
It was around a decline in our advertising investment.
Thank you. Yeah. Alright. Uh,
All my questions have been answered.
Thank you very much. That's really fulsome. Thank you.
Alright, so as far as, um, one thing that's gonna do the,
obviously with the changes in the bill coming in
and with the now licensing online gambling, um, do you see
that as a threat to your revenue?
You go then I'll jump in.
Uh, as currently worded, uh, the bill looks like it will,
um, uh, around 85% of our gains will be protected.
That'll be, um, protected. That's powerful.
Lotto and strike. Uh, that's the intention of cabinet.
The intention is that about, uh, 15%
of our games would be able to be, uh, would be able
to be offered by online casinos.
No, but I mean more broadly when you are doing a, um,
you are obviously you are out, yeah.
Um, planning, do you see that this bill, have you seen that
as something that is likely to impact on your revenue?
It's come, will come down to,
and this is, we're in the middle of, um,
answering submissions for that bill as well.
The art artifacts, like the um,
product definition is really important with that.
Um, and when we look at offshore experience,
typically it doesn't impact the national
lottery in the long run.
But we are like others, we are concerned about the rising
tide gambling when you have 15 new operators in the market.
Alright, so if online gambling, sorry,
advertising was stopped altogether,
have you done any projections about what would
that would likely do to your revenue?
Not project, not not any specific projections,
but as a mass market business
that's highly dependent upon advertising,
it would have a direct impact on, on revenue and
therefore profits back to the community.
But also quite a consequential impact on
small retailers as well.
So we have about 1200 small retailers out there selling
lottery lotto tickets.
So there's no doubt that if at all on as the has been
requested by the petitioner would've, if that happened,
it would have quite an yeah.
On everyone and particularly and including your own. Yes.
Yeah, yeah. Absolutely. Alright, thank you very much.
Thank you. And, um, the TAB
you be Wendy
Potto. Um,
and thank you for the opportunity for TAB New Zealand
to present to the committee today.
Um, my name is Wendy Harvey
and I'm the Deputy chair of TAB New Zealand.
Um, I also chair the net proceeds committee of the TAB,
which is known as the BOBBY Foundation.
And that's charged with responsibility for distributing, um,
the proceeds of the Class four from class four
that we receive, uh, through to both racing
and grassroots sports across New Zealand.
Um, I should also say I'm a former gambling
commissioner of seven years.
Um, I'm joined today by our TAB New Zealand Chief Executive,
uh, Nick Roberts.
And I would like to extend an apology on behalf
of Bill Bernie, uh, the TAB chair
who can't be with us today.
Um, I'll take obviously the submission is re
but um, what I would say is
that TAB New Zealand is a statutory body operating under the
Racing Act 2020.
Our mandate is to maximize revenues for return to racing
and sport while balancing this with a strong commitment
to harm minimization and responsible gambling.
We appreciate the seriousness of the matters raised
by the petition and welcome the opportunity
to provide evidence
and perspective to any questions you may have today
before handing over to Mr. Roberts.
However, I would very briefly just want to outline to you
why the ability to advertise matters to the T-A-B-N-Z.
And that is advertising directs customers
to regulated gambling channels where harm protections exist.
Well the counter to that is that without it we run the risk
of those customers shifting
to unregulated offshore operators.
In other words, the black market
who offer no harm minimization tools return no funding
to New Zealand committees and have no obligation
or indeed incentive
to engage in responsible gambling practices.
Uh, and on that note, I'll hand over to Mr. Roberts
who has, uh, more to add.
Good afternoon. Um, our operating model enables us
to deliver a world class business
through our strategic partner in Tain.
And this extends to our harm minimization tools
and customer monitoring.
When we re-platform the business last year with Entine, uh,
we took the biggest step forward in harm minimization in
New Zealand ever
because we are able to leverage off the size
and scale that Entine has and uh, introduce customer tools.
We're especially now starting to see the benefits of
that investment as we have a single view of a customer
because we've had, uh, support from the,
the house unanimously for the legislative net,
which gives TAB New Zealand, uh,
the exclusive betting rights for New Zealand.
We take our statutory responsibilities seriously
and we know that a recent Ministry of Health survey
through Ipsos found that the age demographic most influenced
by gambling advertising is 45 to 54, followed
by the 35 to 44-year-old demographic.
I think this is important context for the committee.
Gambling is a legitimate legal form of entertainment
and there is no evidence that demonstrates that exists.
The existing model
for local operators under the advertising standards
authority or the DIA is broken.
What is broken and I think unanimously agreed within this
room is what is happening today
through unregulated operators.
And we've gotta be careful not to conflate that with
the advertising by local operators.
However, we know that the government is looking to fix that
through the online casino gambling bill
and we look forward to engaging in that process.
Gambling policy is about striking the right balance
and the current framework for gambling advertising does that
by ensuring we get consumers channeled into
the safest environment.
A blanket ban on advertising will not reduce the rate
of gambling, but will displace commu consumers to offshore
and unregulated operators
and unintended consequence for New Zealand racing and sport
and the wider community open for questions.
Thank you. Um, the current,
the TAB app, um, is a 24 hour app that enables you to open
and gamble anywhere from Hong Kong to Finland to
United States anytime of the day.
Um, so that presumably has increased the opportunity
to gamble when previously the TAB you could only bet on
New Zealand events. That's,
Uh, yeah, the TA B'S always been able
to bet on more product,
but historically we've had, uh,
technological issues to, to do so.
Um, and ability to get vision has become easier over,
over the years to access the, the races. You talk about
Mike, start off, so betting on a New Zealand race
and compared to betting on a finished race mm-hmm does
that return more revenue to the New Zealand racing industry?
The reason I ask that is that often the argument about horse
racing was that there was an associated industry like horse,
horse studs and the horse breeding industry.
Yeah. Um, is that the case or? Yeah.
Um, the first point is the bidding on a New Zealand race
is more profitable for us
'cause we don't have to pay product fees to international,
um, the international jurisdiction that runs those races,
but all of our profits are returned into the industry.
Alright, thank you. Questions. Any other questions?
No, I have some, um, much um,
broader philosophical questions, um, underpin all of this.
Um, but I think they are ones for, I'd like to pick up with,
um, probably with um, um, PGF
and uh, and Peter, um, thh probably offline.
Alright. Okay. Well I just another, so obviously the,
the amount of advertising TAB does
and promotion is pretty hefty compared to most games.
I see someone that submitters made the comment about someone
couldn't watch online lives sport anymore,
which I fully understand
because I think you've got an X all black usually who's
standing there on behalf of the TAB talking about the odds
at halftime and first tri score
or various other things, um, presumably
that has increased revenue considerably that sort
of increased advertising promotion slash promotion.
Yeah, so what we've been trying to do over the last couple
of years is get our market share back to where it was.
And up until the, the house granted the monopoly to the TAB,
we only had about two thirds
of the New Zealand bidding market.
A lot of that, the remainder of
that activity was done offshore
with unregulated environment.
So, uh, that job as well, since the monopoly is to recapture
that market to make sure it is all coming back through us
and that is the basis of the advertising today.
So recapturing versus, um, creating new,
how do you differentiate that?
I think that the first job is to recapture it before new,
but um, I think, you know,
new Zealanders are losing approximately three
and a half to $4 billion a year advertising a year,
I'm sorry, gambling a year.
Um, and we would like to probably increase our market share
of that, but we're not out here to promote, um, you know,
more gambling as such.
I just talking about your market share, um,
I dunno whether you mentioned or not, we have asked some
of the other submitters that are regulated online, ga uh,
the the 15 operators that are gonna be licensed.
Do you, what impact do you think
that's gonna have on your market share?
Yeah, we are concerned about that.
Um, it's hard to kind of know exactly what the outcome is
because it's a very novel approach being taken.
Um, so we have submitted on that bill
and our submission is that we believe there
should be less operators.
We think they should have local connection.
New Zealand has built its
gambling policy on three key things, uh, in its history,
which is to have local operators
to make sure harm is minimized from the product
and to maximize returns to the community,
um, from those profits.
Yeah, it's quite interesting to go to a chartered club
and watch the TAB at one end
and the um, the gambling machines at the other
and there's a bit of a different demographic,
but there's also plenty of interchange
of travel between the two.
Yeah, there, there is a little bit.
Not, not, not that much.
They are a different, you
know, customer. Everyone has different tastes
Graphic, but not totally.
Alright, so, um, committee we've had. Yeah,
Well yeah, one of the questions I'll,
I'll throw you when I could have asked a bit of them is
that the, um, is the, is this prime,
you've touched on it, most parents I'll go ahead.
Is, is this primarily about continuing to, about competing
for a, um, a gambling market
that is staying roughly the same
or is that gambling market growing as we are seeing more
operators and offers out there
and more advertising with, you know, more advertising?
Well, I think that the really hard thing
for everyone at the moment is to know
how big our gambling market is
because we have such a large chunk that is unregulated.
So, um, you know, we, we take a guess
that online casinos is the second biggest market
before non casino class four gambling.
We think it's about 800 million in customer losses a year.
Um, the weight, the betting industry sits about
550 million for, for context.
Um, so I guess we, we, we will know a little bit in a,
a year or so's time once that starts to come in
through the online casino gambling bill.
Alright, well thank you.
Uh, thank you for, oh look, I'll just give the opportunity
as our submitted to the states problem gambling.
Is there anything you'd like
to just add from anything you've heard today?
Um, briefly, uh, um, no other than to go you,
you're welcome to come forward.
I'll just ask to thank you j just, just briefly,
uh, as a summary if you like.
Uh, yeah, I mean we haven't got a lot
to add other than we certainly disagree
with the physician about, um, increased, um, gambling,
advertise leading to harm.
There is a strong body of evidence
and we would very much welcome the opportunity
to provide you with that.
Um, and we will do that if that's possible.
I'd also like to extend the opportunity, if anyone wants
to find out more about the, um, the, um, experiences
of gambling harm on the ground, um,
we'd very much welcome the opportunity
to meet with anyone as well.
Um, but I think, you know, the research that was described
by our colleague, not our colleague,
but um, was um, it's just not true.
Um, and we'll provide um, the counter evidence to that.
Alright, look and look. Thank you everyone.
Um, what we endeavor to do, oh sorry,
there's one gentleman there was just hoping to,
Uh, thank you J and also, uh, honorable members
of both parties of both the House for Opportunity.
My name is Alpe Anthony Alpe.
I'm an organization map we hundred percent support, uh,
the PGF and our submission together.
I'm just speak about, uh, the work
that we do in the community,
especially in our Pacific community in Auckland
and also Wellington as well.
We have a church program that goes on in the community
and the profit that we,
that these come organizations make just
for the gambling machine in Portu alone.
13 million upwards in South Auckland when you look at the
gambling, seven millions in um, qui
and also, uh, 6 million Tara.
And we are finding in the community how difficult it is
to work with our community, especially with the game online
and also the kids are impacted by it as well.
So what we are doing in our community is trying our best.
Unfortunately the numbers that we have is quite difficult
to make sure that we cover the issues
that our community face.
So we a hundred percent support what PGF
and also why you put in place.
Please consider our submission as well. Thanks.
Thank you very much. Alright. And again, thank you.
What we endeavor to do as a committee is to get
as wide a range of views.
We can, we now report back to Parliament.
Um, obviously with the bill that's going
before it's, uh, even more timely that we do so,
so thank you for everyone
that's taking the time to be here today.
Um, and uh, we report, uh, you make sure we get a copy
of our report, um, when it's prepared.
Very much. Thank you.
We are now going.